blog: Add IPFS experiment post (#497)
haiku/website: content/blog/kallisti5/2021-05-03_ipfs_experiment.md

+++
type = "blog"
title = "Haiku's CDN, an IPFS Experiment"
author = "kallisti5"
date = "2021-05-03 15:50:05-05:00"
tags = ["haiku", "software"]
+++

I'm Alex, a member of our systems administration team and on the Haiku, Inc. board of directors.
I have been playing with moving our repositories over to [IPFS](https://ipfs.io), and wanted to collect some feedback on the idea.

## First a little history

With the addition of package management in 2013, Haiku's amount of data to manage has been growing.

> In ~2018 I moved our Haiku package repositories (and nightly images, and release images) to S3 object storage. This helped to reduce the large amount of data we were lugging around on our core infrastructure, and offloaded it onto an externally mananged service which we could progmatically manage. All of our CI/CD could securely and pragmatically build artifacts into these S3 buckets. We found a great vendor which let us host a lot of data with unlimited egress (outbound) bandwidth for an amazing price. This worked great through 2021, however the vendor recently began walking back their "unlimited egress bandwidth" position.  In late April 2021, they shutdown our buckets resulting in a repo + nightly outage of ~24 hours while we negotiated with their support team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Around 2018 I moved our Haiku package repositories (and nightly images, and release images) to S3 object storage. This helped to reduce the large amount of data we were lugging around on our core infrastructure, and offloaded it onto an externally managed service which we could programmatically manage. All of our CI/CD could securely and programmatically build artifacts into these S3 buckets. We found a great vendor which let us host a lot of data with unlimited egress (outbound) bandwidth for an amazing price. This worked great through 2021, however the vendor recently began walking back their "unlimited egress bandwidth" position.  In late April 2021, they shutdown our buckets resulting in a repo + nightly outage of ~24 hours while we negotiated with their support team.
```

**Out of this we get:**

* Anyone can mirror Haiku (not just those with large amounts of free bandwidth or static ip addresses)
* Reduced concern about country-level IP blocks
  * Russia blocks our Digital Ocean VM's as an example.
  * The community can launch a Russian gateways and pin our data within Russia.
* We get transparent deduplication
  * The repo today is ~140 GiB of data, and is ~95 GiB to mirror on disk via IPFS.
* Users can just "access data", or mirror everything locally for a "hyper fast" software repository.
  * Since I have an IPFS node on my network pinning our repos, my Haiku instances update in ~5 seconds.

## The downsides

IPFS *is* a new technology, and there are a lot of sharp edges.

* Everyone pinning needs to to manually "repin" data to pull and mirror the latest repository chunks
* If few people are pinning the latest data, initial lookups of a CID can be a bit slow (3+ minutes)
  * Notice, 3+ minutes is longer than the default HTTP timeout (30 seconds).
  * Gateway timeouts can happen until the IPFS gateway "locates" the data.
* IPFS has a steep learning curve for anyone mirroring. It takes time to find out how to do what

> * Haiku's go-lang port needs a lot more work before we can build IPFS on Haiku.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Haiku's Golang port needs a lot more work before we can build IPFS on Haiku.
```

## Summary

I have no idea if this will work.

The idea is great since it fixes "pretty much all" of our content distribution issues.

* We empower tech-savy users to leverage IPFS locally, while still offering "turn key" access to our software
* We decouple the "large amount of storage" and "large amount of bandwidth" making infrastructure easier
* We enable getting Haiku's software into restrictive geographic regions
* Built-in signature checking ensuring security of data on IPFS
* Deduplication is built-in, saving space

Time will tell if the implementation is viable and reliable enough.

In the short term, our current more traditional repositories
are not going away as long as we can continue to host data from our S3 buckets.  I'm hopeful we can get enough
people playing with the new system to reduce S3 bandwidth and give us some time to investigate this alternative path.

> A few users have mentioned adding native IPFS support to pkgman.. this would enable Haiku to obtain updates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A few users have mentioned adding native IPFS support to pkgman...this would enable Haiku to obtain updates
```
